---
layout: page
title: Homework 2
permalink: /homework/hw2
---

### Directions
Solve the following problems and type up your solutions.  Your solutions should be provided in one of the following formats (in order of preference)
* typed up in $$\LaTeX$$ and submitted as a PDF on Canvas
* written legibly on blank paper, scanned into a PDF and then uploaded on Canvas
* translated into ancient Sumerian and whispered into an bat's ears in the dead of night

If you go with the first strategy, you may wish to check out Overleaf which is a free and intuitive website for generating $$\LaTeX$$ documents online.
If you wish to use the second method and don't own a scanner at home, you can check out the numerous scanning apps available for smartphones.

**Problem 1:** Write each of the following expressions in the form $$a + ib$$ for some real numbers $$a$$ and $$b$$
* **(a)** $$(2 + 3i)(4-i)$$
* **(b)** $$(2 + i)^3$$
* **(c)** $$(3 + i)/(2 + 2i)$$

**Problem 2:** Rewrite each of the following complex numbers in the form $$re^{i\theta}$$ for some real numbers $$r$$ and $$\theta$$ with $0$\leq\theta < 2\pi$$.
* **(a)** $$3 + 2i$$
* **(b)** $$1/(3 + 2i)$$
* **(c)** $$(1 - 3i)^{2021}$$

**Problem 3:** For each of the following binary operations, determine whether the operation is associative and whether it is commutative
* **(a)** binary operation $$*$$ defined on $$\mathbb Q$$ by $$a*b = ab + 1$$
* **(b)** binary operation $$*$$ defined on $$\mathbb R$$ by $$a*b = 3^{ab}$$
* **(c)** binary operation $$*$$ defined on $$\mathbb Z$$ by $$a*b = a + b + 2$$

**Problem 4:** Recall that an **isomorphism** between sets $$(G,*)$$ and $$(H,\star)$$ with binary relations is a bijection $$f: G\rightarrow H$$ satisying the property that

$$f(a*b) = f(a)\star f(b),\quad\text{for all $a,b\in G$}.$$

* **(a)** Show that there is an isomorphism between

$$G = \{0,1,2,3,4,5\}\quad \text{with the binary operation $+_6$}$$

and the set

$$H = \{z\in\bbc : z^6 = 1\}\quad \text{with the binary operation $z*w = zw$}.$$


**Problem 5:** In this problem, we will explore the linear symmetries of the square in the $$x,y$$-plane with vertices $$(1,1),(1,-1),(-1,-1),(-1,1).$$.
There are eight such symmetries, and they are described in detail on the <a target="_parent" href="https://wcasper.github.io/math407spring2021/topics/symmetry-groups.html">groups of symmetries page (link)</a>.  Read this page and then answer the following questions.

* **(a)** Write down a multiplication table for this group.  Please use the same notation as on the website.
* **(b)** Show that every rotation in the group can be created from a product of reflections.  Thus the group is generated by a set of reflections.  Groups which are generated by a finite set of reflections in $$\mathbb R^n$$ are called **reflection groups** and are important in other mathematical fields, such as Lie theory.
* **(c)** Show that every symmetry in the group can be created by starting with $$R_{\pi/2}$$ and $$S_0$$ by taking various products.  This means that $$R_{\pi/2}$$ and $$S_0$$ **generate** the group of symmetries.






