---
layout: page
title: Exam 2
permalink: /exams/exam2
---

Solve each of the following problems.
If the problem asks for a proof, be sure to carefully justify your work, including any theorems from class.

Note: you may NOT use a theorem or result from class to prove something when it makes the problem entirely trivial.  If you are unsure whether a particular theorem or result is allowed, just ask!

## Problem 1 (True or False)

* (a) If $$H$$ is a subgroup of a group $$G$$ and $$H$$ is abelian, then $$H$$ is normal.

* (b) $$\mathbb Z_n$$ is a free abelian group.

* (c) If $$G$$ has only one Sylow $$p$$-subgroup $$P$$ for some prime number $$p$$, then $$P$$ is normal

* (d) Any group of order $$9$$ is abelian

* (e) If $$H$$ is a normal subgroup of a group $$G$$ and both $$H$$ and $$G/H$$ are abelian, then $$G$$ is abelian

## Problem 2

* (a) State the first isomorphism theorem for groups.

* (b) State Cauchy's Theorem.

* (c) Give an example of a noncommutative group whose center has more than one element.

## Problem 3

Let $$G$$ be the group of $$2\times 2$$ invertible matrices with entries in $$\mathbb Z_3$$, where the group operation is matrix multiplication but where the multiplication and addition of entries is modular.  Note that $$G$$ has $$48$$ elements total.

* (a) What is the size of a Sylow $$2$$-subgroup of $$G$$?  What about the size of a Sylow $$3$$-subgroup?

* (b) How many Sylow $$3$$-subgroups does $$G$$ have?  Carefully justify your answer.

* (c) How many Sylow $$2$$-subgroups does $$G$$ have?  Carefully justify your answer.

## Problem 4

Let $$G = \mathbb Z\times \mathbb Z$$ and let $$H$$ be the subgroup of $$G$$ generated by the elements $$(4,6)$$ and $$(2,10)$$.

* (a) Write down explicitly the distinct cosets of $$H$$ in $$G$$.

* (b) Determine what finite abelian group $$G/H$$ is isomorphic to in invariant factor form.

## Problem 5

Suppose that $$G$$ is a cyclic group and that $$H$$ is a subgroup of $$G$$.
Prove that the quotient group $$G/H$$ is also cyclic.

## Problem 6

Fix a prime integer $$p$$.
Let $$G$$ be the group of $$2\times 2$$ invertible matrices with entries in $$\mathbb Z_p$$, where the group operation is matrix multiplication but where the multiplication and addition of entries is modular.
Note that the group in problem $$3$$ is a special case.

The group $$G$$ has a natural action on the set $$X$$ of nonzero vectors in $$\mathbb Z_p^2:$$

$$X = \{\binom{a}{b}: a,b\in \mathbb Z_3,\ \text{where $a$ and $b$ are not both zero\}.$$

The action is given by matrix multiplication $$A\cdot \vec x = A\vec x$$, ie.

$$\left(\begin{array}{cc}a & b\\c & d\end{array}\right)\cdot \binom{x}{y} = \binom{ax+by}{cx+dy}.$$

* (a) Explain why $$X$$ has $$p^2-1$$ many elements.
* (b) Determine explicitly the orbit of the element $$\vec x = \binom{1}{0}$$ under this action.  How many elements are in the orbit?
* (c) Determine explicitly the stabilizer subgroup $$G_{\vec x}$$ of the element $$\vec x = \binom{1}{0}$$ under this action.  How large is this subgroup.
* (d) Use the Orbit-Stabilizer theorem to determine the size of the whole group $$G$$.

## Problem 7

Let $$G$$ be a group of order $$p^n$$ for some prime $$p$$ and some integer $$n>0$$.
Use the action of $$G$$ on itself by conjugation to prove that the center of $$G$$ is nontrivial.

