---
layout: page
title: Final Exam In-Class Portion
permalink: /exams/final-inclass
---

Solve each of the following problems.
If the problem asks for a proof, be sure to carefully justify your work, including any theorems from class.

Note: you may NOT use a theorem or result from class to prove something when it makes the problem entirely trivial.  If you are unsure whether a particular theorem or result is allowed, just ask!

## Problem 1

**True or False.**  For each of the following questions, write TRUE if the statment is true and FALSE if the statement is FALSE. No justification is necessary.

* (a) If $$H$$ is a normal subgroup of $$G$$ and $$K$$ is a normal subgroup of $$H$$, then $$K$$ is a normal subgroup of $$G$$.
* (b) Up to isomorphism, there are exactly $$6$$ abelian groups of order $$54$$.
* (c) The group $$\mathbb Q$$ with binary operation $$+$$ is a free abelian group.
* (d) If $$f(x)\in\mathbb Q[x]$$ is irreducible, then all the roots of $$f(x)$$ are different.
* (e) If $$R$$ is an integral domain, then there exists a field $$F$$ with $$R$$ a subring of $$F$$.


## Problem 2

* (a) Let $$R$$ be a commutative ring.  Write the definition of $$I$$ being an ideal of $$R$$.
* (b) Let $$E$$ be a field extension of a field $$F$$ and let $$a\in E$$.  Write the definition of $$a$$ being algebraic over $$F$$.
* (c) Write the Structure Theorem for finitely generated abelian groups in invariant factor form.
* (d) Let $$E$$ be a field extension of $$F$$.  Define what it means for $$f(x)\in F[x]$$ to split over $$E$$.
* (e) Give an example of a field extension which is not normal.

## Problem 3

Let $$G$$ be the group

$$G = \left\lbrace
\left(\begin{array}{cc}
a & b\\
0 & a^{-1}
\end{array}\right) : a,b\in \mathbb Z_5,\ a\neq 0.\right\rbrace.$$

* (a) Determine the order of $$G$$.
* (b) Consider the subgroup

$$H = \left\lbrace
\left(\begin{array}{cc}
a & 0\\
0 & a^{-1}
\end{array}\right) : a\in \mathbb Z_5,\ a\neq 0.\right\rbrace.$$

Show that $$H$$ is order $$4$$ and is not a normal subgroup of $$G$$.

* (c) Determine the number of Sylow $$5$$-subgroups of $$G$$.
* (d) Determine the number of Sylow $$2$$-subgroups of $$G$$.  [Hint: use (b)]

## Problem 4

For each of the following rings, determine whether the ring is isomorphic to $$\mathbb Q[\sqrt{3}]$$.
If the two rings are isomorphic, provide an explicit isomorphism.
If the two rings are not isomorphic, carefully explain why no isomorphism exists.

* (a) $$\mathbb Q[x]/\langle x^2-3\rangle,\quad \text{where $\langle x^2-3\rangle$ is the ideal generated by $x^2-3$}.$$
* (b) $$\mathbb Q \times \mathbb Q.$$
* (c) $$\mathbb Q[\sqrt{2}]$$

## Problem 5

Let $$\mathcal C(R)$$ be the ring of continuous functions $$\mathbb R\rightarrow\mathbb R$$ where the sum $$f+g$$ and product $$fg$$ of two functions $$f,g\in R$$ are the functions defined by

$$f+g: x\mapsto f(x) + g(x),\quad fg: x\mapsto f(x)g(x),\ \forall x\in\mathbb R.$$

* (a) Prove that $$\mathcal C(R)$$ is **not** an integral domain.
* (b) Determine, with careful justification, which of the following subsets of $$\mathcal C(R)$$ are ideals 

$$I = \{f(x)\in\mathcal C(x): f(2) = f(3).\}$$

$$J = \{f(x)\in\mathcal C(x): f(2) = 0,\ \text{and}\ f(3) = 0\}.$$

$$Q = \{f(x)\in\mathcal C(x): f(2) = 0,\ \text{or}\ f(3) = 0\}.$$


## Problem 6
Let $$R$$ be a ring and $$F$$ be a field.  Prove that if $$\varphi: F\rightarrow R$$ is a ring homomorphism, then either $$\text{img}(\varphi) = \{0\}$$ or else $$\varphi$$ is injective.


## Problem 7

Let $$p$$ be prime and let $$E$$ be a finite field of order $$q = p^n$$ and let $$1$$ denote the multiplicative identity of $$E$$.

The function

$$\varphi: E\rightarrow E,\quad \varphi(x) = x^p$$ 

defines a field automorphism of $$E$$.

* (a) Prove that the subfield $$F = \{a\in E: \varphi(a)=a\}$$ of $$E$$ fixed by $$\varphi$$ is $$\{0,1,2,\dots,p-1\}$$.  [Hint: remember that a $$x^p-x$$ has at most $$p$$ roots]

* (b) Show that if $$V$$ is an $$d$$-dimensional vector space over $$F$$, then $$V$$ has $$p^d$$ elements.  Conclude that $$[E: F] = n$$.

* (c) Show that the order of the element $$\varphi$$ in $$G(E/F)$$ is $$n$$.  Conclude that $$G(E/F)$$ is a cyclic group generated by $$\varphi$$.


