---
layout: page
title: Final Exam Take-home Portion
permalink: /exams/final-takehome
---

Solve each of the following problems and carefully show your work.
You may use your textbook and your notes, but you are not allowed to consult with other people or use any online resources.
Your 

Note: you may NOT use a theorem or result from class to prove something when it makes the problem entirely trivial.  If you are unsure whether a particular theorem or result is allowed, just ask!

## Problem 1

Let $$R$$ be a commutative ring with identity.
An ideal $$I$$ of $$R$$ is called **maximal** if whenever $$J$$ is an ideal of $$R$$ containing $$I$$, then $$J=I$$ or $$J=R$$.

* (a) Prove that if $$I,J\subseteq R$$ are both ideals of $$R$$, then

$$I + J = \{b + c: b\in I,\ c\in J\}$$

is also an ideal of $$R$$.  In particular, if $$a\in R$$ then $$I + \langle a \rangle$$ is an ideal of $$R$$, where here $$\langle a \rangle = aR$$ is the ideal generated by $$a$$.

* (b) Use part (a) to prove that if $$I\subseteq R$$ is a maximal ideal, then $$R/I$$ is a field.

* (c) Prove that if $$I\subseteq R$$ is an ideal and $$R/I$$ is a field, then $$I$$ must be maximal.

## Problem 2

Let $$G$$ be a group of order $$2022 = 2\cdot 3\cdot 337$$.

* (a) Prove that $$G$$ has a group unique subgroup of order $$337$$, and that this subgroup is normal in $$G$$.
* (b) Assuming that $$G$$ has more than one element of order $$3$$, how many elements of of order $$3$$ will $$G$$ have?  [Hint: figure out how many Sylow $$3$$-subgroups $$G$$ has and go from there].

## Problem 3

Let $$E$$ be the splitting field of $$x^5-1$$ over $$F = \mathbb Q$$.

* (a) Give a basis for $$E$$ over $$F$$.
* (b) Determine explicitly the elements of $$G(E/F)$$ and show that $$\lvert G(E/F) \rvert = [E:F]$$.  Which well-known group is $$G(E/F)$$ isomorphic to?
* (c) Find an element $$a\in E$$ with $$a\notin \mathbb Q$$ such that $$\mathbb Q(a)\neq E$$.
