---
layout: page
title: Practice Exam 2
permalink: /exams/practice-exam2
---

Solve each of the following problems.
If the problem asks for a proof, be sure to carefully justify your work, including any theorems from class.

Note: you may NOT use a theorem or result from class to prove something when it makes the problem entirely trivial.  If you are unsure whether a particular theorem or result is allowed, just ask!

## Problem 1 (True or False)

Let $$G$$ be a group.

* (a) If $$H$$ is a normal subgroup of $$G$$ and $$K$$ is a normal subgroup of $$H$$, then $$K$$ is a normal subgroup of $$G$$.

* (b) If $$G$$ is a finitely generated free abelian group and $$H$$ is a subgroup of $$G$$ then $$H$$ is also a finitely generated free abelian group.

* (c) If $$H$$ and $$K$$ are subgroups of $$G$$, then $$HK$$ is a subgroup of $$G$$.

* (d) If $$p$$ is a prime number dividing the order of $G$, then $G$ has an element of order $$p$$.

* (e) Any three linearly independent vectors in $$\mathbb Z^3$$ will generate $$\mathbb Z^3$$.

## Problem 2

* (a) State the third isomorphism theorem for groups.

* (b) State the second Sylow theorem.

* (c) Give an example of a group whose center is only the identity $$\{e\}$$.

## Problem 3

Suppose that $$G$$ is a group of order $$255 = 3\cdot5\cdot 17$$.

* (a) According to the Sylow theorems, how many Sylow $$3$$-subgroups can $$G$$ have?

* (b) According to the Sylow theorems, how many Sylow $$5$$-subgroups can $$G$$ have?

* (c) According to the Sylow theorems, how many Sylow $$17$$-subgroups can $$G$$ have?

## Problem 4

Let $$G = \mathbb Z\times \mathbb Z$$ and let $$H$$ be the subgroup of $$G$$ generated by the elements $$(6,9)$$ and $$(2,2)$$.

a) Write down explicitly the distinct cosets of $$H$$ in $$G$$.

b) Determine what finite abelian group $$G/H$$ is isomorphic to in invariant factor form.

## Problem 5

Let $$N$$ be a normal subgroup of $$G$$ with $$[G:N] = n$$.
Show that $$x^n\in H$$ for all $$x\in G$$.

## Problem 6

Let $$G$$ be a group and suppose that $$p$$ is a prime number dividing the order of $$G$$.
Fix an element $$x\in G$$ and consider the two subgroups

$$H = \{g\in G: gx = xg\}$$

$$K = \{gxg^{-1}: g\in G\}$$

Prove that $$p$$ divides the order of $$H$$ or the order of $$K$$ (or both).
[Hint: consider the action of $$G$$ on itself by conjugation]

## Problem 7

Let $$G$$ be a group of order $$p^3$$ for some prime $$p$$.
Use the action of $$G$$ on itself by conjugation to prove that the center of $$G$$ must have order $$p$$ or $$p^3$$.
Give and example of a value of $$p$$ and two groups where both possibilities hold.


